The CRM114 Discriminator system was written mostly while going to and
from my day job on Boston's MBTA commuter rail trains.  The
development machine was a Sony Picturebook C1VP running Red Hat Linux
7.2 ( soon upgraded to Red Hat 7.3, then RH 7.3 on a Fujitsu P2120).
Editing was with GNU Emacs 21.2.1 , compiling was with GCC 2.96, and
debugging with GDB frontended with DDD 3.3.1 .

It took about 100 days of commuting to do the initial work, mostly in
1/2 hour stretches.  This included design, coding, testing, and
documentation.  I expect that it shows.  The upside of all this is
that the code is simple enough to understand because it's all
comprehendable in 1/2 hour stretches.  The downside is that it
probably reads in a somewhat choppy style.

If CRM114 is useful code to someone, please use it; if you find a bug
or an weirdness, send in an email and we'll create a fix or an
update.  Like the readme says, this isn't the PERL swiss army knife,
this is a razor-sharp katana that can talk.

Much of the power of CRM114 versus Perl, awk, et al is due to the
linear-time and approximate regex matching engines written by Ville
Laurikari, and all the glory for that particular section of the code
belongs to Ville, not me.

I would like to thank Darren Leigh, David Kramer, Reto Lichtensteiger,
John Bowker, Ville Laurikari, Eric Johanssen, Adolfo Santiago, Danko
Miklos, Dave Corcoran, Ben Livingood, George Burdell, P Oscar Boykin,
Corrado Cau, Ruven Gottlieb, Kurt Bigler, Barry Jaspan, Fidelis Assis,
Christian Siefkes, Shalendra Chhabra, Paolo Pazolli, and many others
for their sharp eyes and analytic skills.

I would also like to thank Richard M. Stallman and Linus Torvalds, for
leading by example.

This code is copyrighted by William S. Yerazunis, and released under
the Free Software Foundation's GPL license, version 2.0 or later; a
copy is enclosed.  Go to www.fsf.org to get newer versions, if
desired.  If you need a different release, please contact the author;
release under other licensing arrangements is possible to negotiate.

As Napoleon said:

    "When all else fails, march toward the sound of the guns."

        -Bill Yerazunis




